All right, welcome back everybody. This
is lecture A2 of statistical rethinking
2026.
Last time here in the in the beginner
section in section A, um I had started
to introduce you to the basics of
probability theory and we were sampling
from a four-sided globe. If you
remember, uh trying to infer the
proportion of the globe covered in
water. So we're going to pick up from
there. uh before we had gotten up just
to the point where I was about to reveal
to you that we had been doing basian
inference. Uh so let me remind you in
the context of the core basian workflow
what we've accomplished so far in uh
filling in this skeleton of a workflow
in the context of the globe tossing
thought experiment. uh we have a
generative model which is the globe
tossing model um and we have a specific
question or estim that is we want to
learn the proportion of the globe that's
covered in water and what we've been
doing now is combining those two things
uh to produce a statistical model a
basic basian estimator like all of the
models in this course will be basian
estimators uh just as a as a side
comment that maybe help you relax a bit
is that one of the very uh convenient
things about the basian framework there
are inconvenient things there absolutely
are but the convenient thing is there's
only one way to learn from data there's
just basian updating uh and this stands
in stark contrast to non-basian
approaches which have no coherence about
how to generate estimators at all
there's in general no central theory
outside of of the basian framework for
generating estimators you just make make
one and evaluate
Right? So that's how frequent statistics
works. You make an estimator and you try
it out and you evaluate its properties.
In bay, there's a there's a logical way
to make the estimator which guarantees
certain properties. That's different.
That isn't to say that the non-basian
approach doesn't work because it does.
It's just that the logic is kind of
inverted there in a sense, right? We
have this central one way to learn from
data in bay. That's basian updating. And
you're learning it now. And it might
seem weird. It might not if you've seen
it before, but once this is done, every
other example in the course uses the
same motor. All right. Which is very
relaxing. Yeah. Uh trust me, it will be
very relaxing for you. So that's what
we've been doing. Um and in this
lecture, I'm going to get to the end of
this workflow. We're going to get an
estimate and then we're going to do
something with it. Yay.
Yes. Okay. Very exciting. All right. So
here's where we were before. This is
repeating slides the last slides from
the previous lecture. Um we have done
basian estimating with our foursided uh
globe. Um
someone was was nice enough to bring me
some D and D dice. So here's an actual
four-sided die if you've never seen one,
right? Or you're not watching Stranger
Things or whatever popular TV show plays
D and D these days. So that you could do
this experiment physically if you have
some dice like this, right? um you don't
have to take my word for it. Uh so to
remind you what this table is showing,
each row is a possible explanation a
state of the generative model of the
four-sided globe. That is how much of
the of the four-sided globe is covered
in water. Either uh none of it, one
quarter of it, half of it, threequarters
of it, or all of it. Those are the rows
in order. And then going left to right,
we have the sequential observations from
tossing the dye or tossing the globe and
seeing which side comes up. And so in
the first toss, we get a water, a blue,
um, and then we're counting in that
first column all the ways in the garden
of forking data that each of those
possibilities in the far left column
could produce that result. Right? So in
the first one there are zero ways. If
you see water and the hypothesis is that
there's no water then it's eliminated,
right? So that's what the zero is. Yeah.
A question.
>> I was trying to do the exercise and I
was really lost. Um and to be honest,
what is P in this formula? So four is
because it's a foursided.
>> Yes, the P is the proportion of water.
It's the proportion. There are four
sides and P is the proportion of them
that are covered in water. that would
change depending on
>> exactly. So
>> it's 0.25.5
75 and one going down. Yeah, that's a
good question. Does that make sense?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. But then it's just I I guess I
struggle a little bit to
to see what is kind of the question or
the question mark or
>> the question is what is P?
>> Yeah,
>> that's the question. The question is do
that start that's our estim
that's covered in water and that the
symbol for that is P. I had defined that
on one of the slides earlier. It's nice
to have a symbol for it because the four
is because this is a four-sided globe
but in a moment there are going to be
more sides.
>> Yeah, but then um
like you are going to feed to P all the
possible values and then say this one is
the most likely with combination. We're
going to um for every possible value of
P, we're going to rank it relative to
all the others in its plausibility.
>> Okay,
>> we're not looking for a single value.
We're looking for for every possible
value of P to characterize what the
evidence says about it relative to the
other values. And that's the goal of
basian inference. That's where we're
going to go. We've got like five slides
if you'll bear with me. I know it's a
bit like we're in the middle of like the
world's longest basine updating exercise
because I take two hours to do what is
like three lines of calculus, right? Uh,
so but and and I know that that's not
necessarily everybody's idea of a
relaxing lecture, but we're almost
there. And then we'll move faster once
we've got this, but I want to go really
slow um with this basic logic because
then it it gets blackboxed away from you
for the rest of the examples in the
course. And so this is our only chance
to enjoy it. Yeah. If if this is your
idea of fun. Um but anyway, thank you
for the question. I'm sure other people
had the same question. So, uh, now where
was I? I was in the first column there
with the first blue sample. The next one
we get a land. We update the counts. Um,
the first one is still eliminated. Uh,
what we're doing here is just
multiplying
uh as we go across. This is what I
showed you with the garden before is
that it's you can do all the counting in
the garden, but with each new sample, we
update just by multiplying by the new
number of ways. We take the previous
number of ways and multiply it by the
new number of ways. Um, so for the uh
for the land value, it's the reverse of
the um of the water value. Uh you've got
zero on the bottom and 1 2 3 four up.
But if we multiply 0 * 4, we get zero.
So the count for the first possibility
is still zero. Um the count for the
second one is three because it's 1 times
three. There are one way to get the
water and three ways to get the land. So
there's three ways total, right? For the
middle one, the 50/50, there are two
ways to get the first water toss. There
are two ways to get the land, right?
Because there are two sides that it's a
four-sided die. There are two sides with
land and two sides with water. So, it's
2 * 2 is four. Yeah. Isn't this cool?
You haven't done this math since grade
school. Welcome back. This is this is
cutting edge statistics. All right. So,
it's now now three out of four. So,
we've got three * 1, which gives us
three in the second column. Yeah. And
then the final one is four time zero,
which is zero. Are you with me? There
are some happy faces and some pain
faces. And I'm I'm my goal is to make
you all happy and I will fail. But yeah,
there's a hand.
>> Um, can you explain at the right hand
end of the the formula that
>> Yes, I'm going to get there. That's
exactly where I'm heading. Thank you.
Thank you for that question. Yes, it's
exactly where I'm going. So, um, uh, so
those are the first two columns. And
then the third one again we're gonna
we're going to count up all the ways to
get another water and multiply that by
the previous counts. And that gives us
the counts in the third column. And then
for the fourth and the fifth and the
sixth and the seventh and the eighth.
The final one the that I've got in the
red box. This is the last observation in
this sample. The numbers on the left are
the final counts which are you get just
by continuing the multiplication all the
way across and you get those big counts.
That is zero ways to realize the first
possibility. 27 ways to realize this
sample conditional
on the globe having one side that is
water. Uh 512 ways to see this sample
conditional on the globe having two
sides that are covered in water. 729
ways to realize this sample if 3/4 of
the globe is covered in water. And then
again zero ways if it's completely
covered in water because we saw land.
Yeah, that's the part that's easy.
That's a question. Yes.
>> Um, thinking back to the question, this
sample was order, right? This is not
equivalent to saying we have just three
times land and seven times water. This
has a sequence.
>> I'm doing it as a sequential because I
don't want to deal with the with the
factorial issue there. Yeah. Yeah. But
you'll get the same inference. I I leave
that as an exercise to the student.
Actually, I think it's a problem at the
end of the chapter.
>> But the homework actually
>> Yeah. In the homework, you need to think
about different paths. That's the trick
with it. Yeah, we can we can talk about
that if if there's some time at the end.
Okay, let me so I'll get to your
question. I want to keep explaining it.
Okay. So now after the equal sign, I'm
just giving you a compact formula for
computing this. So you don't have to
make a table like this. That if you
wanted to get these counts just from
knowing the sample and the sample
counts, it's just um the number of ways
for that possibility to produce a water
exponentiated by the number of waters
because it's that many. So in this case,
it's let's let's do the one out of four
case. The second row, it's 1 6 * 3r
because there's one side that's water.
So there's one way to see a water and
there are six waters in this sample. So
it's six ones. It's 1 * 1 * 1 * 1 * 1 *
1. Yeah. Which is one to the six for a
sane person. Yes. Um and then there are
three ways to see a land. And we've seen
three lands in this sample. So it's 33
which is 3 * 3 * 3 that's the
multiplication as we went across the row
and that's all it is and that is basine
updating
it really is that now in a moment I'm
going to convert this to probability
instead of counts because in any
reasonably sized sample these counts get
gigantic really really fast but this is
the core logic.
Did this answer the question about what
these mad numbers are on the far right?
Yeah. um depending upon the generative
model this formula can be different. So
this isn't true in all cases. This is
just true in this particular case that
it's just straight multiplication. We
will have models where there's
mixtures in them. And when we get to
that, I'll talk about what that means.
But when you have a mixture model,
there's a plus in the formula and you've
got some convex combination of terms.
And but we don't have that now. But in
many almost all of simple statistical
cases, this is the the it's just
multiplication that's going on. But it's
not always true. Okay. Um so where does
probability come from? Probability is
just defined as non- negative values
that sum to one. Those are
probabilities. Uh we work with
probabilities in a probability theory
because for any reason even a moderately
sized sample, the number of ways to
realize any particular data set is huge.
Right? There are many possible data sets
in a re in a moderatelysized sample and
there are many ways to realize any
particular one of them. Now, some are
more plausible than others and it's the
relative counts that matter. So, the
same logic applies, but you don't want
to carry around numbers in the billions.
That's a billion, right? Yeah, that's a
billion. Yeah. And then it'll get into
trillions and whatever comes after
trillions, some other madeup number.
Yeah. And um in California, we would
have said this is a hella big number. At
least in my generation. Anybody knows
Hela? It's it's been petitioned to to be
a a standard metric unit. Hela. I think
it's bigger than giga. It's a hella. No,
it was really petitioned, but we lost.
Anyway, so we don't want to deal with
these hella big counts. Uh we want to
normalize them so we can do all the
comparisons uh and and make the updating
easier. And so we convert them to
probabilities. And all we have to do to
convert counts to probabilities is
divide each count by the sum of all the
counts.
I'll say that again. All you have to do
to convert counts to probabilities is
convert is divide each count by the sum
of all counts. So in this case um on the
far left of this table I've got the
different possibilities. That is the the
values of P the thing we're trying to
estimate um the proportion of the globe
that's covered in water. Yeah.
Uh I've got the final counts from that
previous table. The ways that uh each of
those possibilities could produce the
sample 0 27 52 729 and zero. And if we
convert those to proportions just by
taking each of those counts and dividing
by the sum of that middle column, you
get the proportions on the far right
column there. 02
point47 and zero. And those are the
relative out of one, right? uh no
information has been lost that matters
to us because it's only the relative
value that matters. But for any size
data set, we can standardize them so
that they sum to one and that's what
probabilities are. Um and then I've made
a handy bar graph to to help you
visualize what those relative
proportions look like. And those are
weights of evidence. Yeah. Uh and so the
most uh plausible value here is 0 75,
but there's lots of support for 0.5.
Don't give up on it if you're hoping for
it. You might feel like you're going to
give up on on 0.25 though. And zero and
one are out. Yeah, they're logically
impossible
and their probability is exactly zero uh
in this. Are you with me? Um we're going
to apply this same basic logic to
starting next week to multiple
regression because the same logic for a
basian regression is underneath it. It's
just that the counting of ways is more
complicated because we have continuous
distributions and other things where you
think like well how do you count stuff
when there are infinite possibilities?
Uh the answer is very carefully. Yeah.
But no, we can do this. Um uh we have we
have uh infinities. We have an infinite
number of infinities and each is
infinitely bigger than the previous.
Right? So we can easily do stuff like
this. Uh we will do it. Don't worry
about that. Um oh yeah I wanted to
highlight this. These probabilities
in when you're doing basian inference
are called the posterior distribution.
They're the distribution that gives you
the relative plausibilities of the
different possibilities after updating
on data. That's what makes it posterior.
Yeah. Uh there's a prior distribution.
We'll talk a lot about that uh as well.
And that's just whatever the posterior
was before you got new data.
Okay. Uh, and then you might say, well,
what if I have no data? Well, your
generative model should still make
predictions. So, it still has some prior
distribution. It still has some default
distribution of expectations. And we're
going to spend a lot of time in later
examples um simulating prior dist
simulating predictions from models that
haven't seen data yet and then gradually
updating them with uh with data to see
how the inference changes.
Good.
Um,
we're going to spend uh chapter three of
the book, which I really strongly
encourage you to read because it goes
through the code much more slowly than I
have time to do in the lecture. Uh,
spends time doing this sampling with
simple uh scripts. Uh, the examples in
the book are our code, but if you go to
the book web page, you'll find
translations into Python and Julia and
whatever else you like. Yeah, maybe mat
lab even, god forbid.
Um but uh here's here's a simple way to
think about it. We we define the sample
on the first line of this code. Um we
count up the number of W's and the
number of L's with the next two lines.
Then I define this vector of possible
values of P which are the proportions of
water on the globe. Um and then for each
of those I simply count up the number of
ways. And that's what that line starting
with the symbol ways means. And then I
convert them to probabilities with the
second to last line where I just take
the number of ways and divide it by the
sum of ways. And that's easy. And then I
can get this graph. Yeah, usually when
we do stats, we don't bother with this.
It's all uh done automatically for us in
the inference engine, which is nice. or
we use an algorithm like marov chain
Monte Carlo um which uh has a whole
different way of of dealing with this.
It produces samples from the posterior
distribution which is something we're
going to really like and enjoy. Uh but
this is the core logic of what we're
trying to estimate.
Okay. Um
let's talk about more possibilities. So
I've done this in a finite space because
hopefully it's easier to understand. We
can count stuff on a four-sided die.
Yeah. Uh but obviously a globe has more
than four sides. So where's the logic to
this? And um actually we want to
consider every possible
uh value of the of P between zero and
one. So we could also consider a
10-sided globe
um a 10-sided die uh or a 20-sided die
or even more. I think there's even more
sides. Some die or even higher. I think
the largest I've ever seen is 20, but
I'm sure some mad person has created a
100-sided die once, right? Must be
really big. Um,
uh, so when we do this, we get more
possible values of P, which is what you
see at the bottom of this slide. So,
let's I'm going to in in, uh, at a much
faster speed, I'm going to repeat uh,
the previous exercise with each of the
two new, um, dice, okay? And just show
you what it looks like. So to remind you
with with the four-sided globe, uh this
is the posterior distribution. It comes
from counting up all the ways the sample
could arise for each of the
possibilities. Um for the 10sided die,
there are 11 possible values of P.
Um and then we get a new histogram, a
new posterior distribution which looks
like this. This is looking much more
like statistics now, isn't it? Yeah. um
uh with values around uh about around.7
65 um being the most plausible but
there's lots of uncertainty because it's
a small sample right so this is actually
what you want the job of statistics is
not to give you the answer you want but
to tell you what the data justify yeah
um so it's not bad when a statistical
method is uncertain that's good a
statistical method that is not uncertain
is bad news right uh and Then the uh
20sided die has 21 possibilities. And
now we have a very smooth. This is
actually good enough for most things. Uh
but we're going to do better. We're
going to do an infinite number of sides
in a moment. Um does this help a little
bit to see what we're doing? It's the
same logic. There's more counting, but
once it's in code form, you're not
counting manually anyway, and it goes
really fast.
Uh okay. to go to infinite
possibilities. All we need to do to
realize is that um you can think of a
one definition of a globe is a
polyhedrin with an infinite number of
sides if if you're a normal person,
right? And so the the posterior
probability of any side P is
proportional to P to the W * 1 - P to
the L where W and L are the counts of
water and land. And you saw this already
in the formula we had derived before.
Now I'm just taking it to the limit
where there's an infinite number of
sides. It's proportional to this. Um
and so if we want uh to normalize these
counts so that their probabilities, what
we need to do is divide this proportion
P to the W 1 - P to the L by the sum of
all of those counts for every value of
P. So P can take on any value between
zero and one, right? It's continuous.
And you learned at some point in your
education that if you wanted to do this
for a continuous space, you needed to do
a thing called an integral. Yeah. Which
is a a fancy sum. I will say that and
then I will get hate mail from
mathematicians by saying an integral is
a fancy sum. Forgive me. But um but in
this case in probability theory, it
usually just is that. Not always, but
usually. So in this case uh those of you
who who remember integral calculus you
remember that uh it's a betrayal because
in your first calculus course there were
there were all these rules you learned
for taking derivatives and under quite
general conditions you could always use
them right you could always get the
answer take the derivative of this you
can do it yeah just ask your computer to
do it or ask the internet uh integral
calculus is not like that even though
it's just the reverse it involves a
tremendous amount of guessing there our
methods, yes, but they don't always
work. Um, you can get famous for solving
integrals still in mathematics. It's
really a whole different area. But in
this case, this integral is ancient and
wellknown and actually easy to get. It's
a famous integral. We're not going to do
it here because this is not a calculus
course. But um then if you want to
divide this these proportions for every
value of p between 0 and one by the sum
of them we get the expression at the
bottom. Uh where all of this well I have
another slide to show you this. Um all
of this factorial nonsense in the front
is just what's called a normalizing
constant. It's just there so that
everything sums to one. That's its only
function. So you can kind of ignore it.
And this is true in lots of probability
expressions is that there's this big
normalizing chunk in the front which is
just there to make sure everything sums
to one. But it's not doing anything else
and there's typically nothing to
understand about it. Yeah, in this case
there is and if we were doing a math
stats course I would spend the next like
15 minutes talking about this factorial
because it's it's about combinotaurics
and it's cool but we're not going to do
that. So uh but uh you'll see that the
proportional part there the the part
that's about counting is still the same
and that's the part that gives you the
relative sizes because for every value
of p the normalizing constant part is
the same because it only depends upon
the sample. It just has W's and L's in
it. It's not a function of the change in
the hypothesis of the generating model.
So the relative differences in posterior
probability just depend upon P. Yeah.
which is what we want.
Are we good? So, this is the first and
possibly the last. Maybe there's one
later in in the course um time when
we're going to have a closed
mathematical solution for the posterior
distribution. Usually, that's too hard
to do. You can rig fancy examples where
it's true, but for most of applied
statistics and the sorts of problems
that you folks want to work on, it will
not be possible to close the integral.
And so we will do we will do numerical
integration uh in order to to solve the
problem some sort of numerical
approximation to get these integrals and
I'll introduce you to a couple of
different ways to do it starting in the
next lecture. Okay. But this is the
logic.
Um now to make let's look at the more
interesting part of this.
Let me animate this and try to break
down the logic for you of multiplication
to show you that it's still there in the
continuous space. So, what I've got on
this slide now, this is our globe. I'm
going to start animating in a second to
take samples from it, just as before.
And the plot on the right, which is
currently uh empty. On the horizontal,
we have every possible value of P, the
proportion of water on the globe between
0 and one. We're not going to neglect
any of them. It's the whole real number
line between 0 and one. Okay. Um, and
the vertical axis is this mystical thing
called density.
Density is the rate of change in
cumulative probability. Yeah, that
helps, right? No, so this these this
axis is the relative plausibility of the
different values on the x-axis. But you
get it by taking the derivatives uh of
the cumulative probability distribution,
which may not help any. It helps some of
you. I see a head nodding. So it helps
somebody good. But um you can read this
in a squishy way as relative support for
each of the values on the x-axis. But it
has a pre precise mathematical
definition. It has no units because
probability has no units.
Yeah, this is right. It's not
probability doesn't come in kilograms or
anything like that. Probability is a is
a count divided by a count of the same
thing. And so the units cancel, right?
It's a unitless thing. And so there's no
units in this business. Okay. So let's
consider the first one. we get our first
count and it's land. Um what what has
happened here on this line is we've
shifted from the prior probability which
is that dashed horizontal line. I just
set up this model so that the prior
probability was that you were
indifferent across all of the possible
values which is not what you would be
because you are you are a resident of
this planet and you know that more than
half of the surface of Earth is covered
in water, right? Everybody learns this
in grade school. Yeah. So you're you
probably eliminate all the possibilities
below a half. But let's let's play dumb
for a moment just for the sake of the
exercise. And then we observe this one
land sample and we update according to
the counts. And what we get is this um
this diagonal line starts with a a
density of of two on the far left and
goes down to zero at one on the right.
Um the two is is sort of a meaningless
value because it's just a rate of change
in the cumulative probability. The unit
isn't something to interpret. But the
zero is something you can interpret here
because you know that if the value one
on the far right, if the globe was
completely covered in water, we would
never see this this observation, right?
So that's why it goes to zero there. Um,
and then it's it's just a constant
change because as the proportion goes
up, we get more and more sides that
could produce land just like we saw in
the tables before. Does this make some
sense intuitively? It's the same idea.
Even though there's an infinite number
of sides now, the logic is the same. Um,
oh, I had some I had some labels. Here
are the labels for all the stuff I just
told you. Okay. Uh,
yes. And densities to relative
proportion. Let's let's toss the globe
one more time. We're going to get two
samples. Now we get a land and a water.
Now this is the posterior distribution.
It's this nice dome shape. And you might
think, "Wow, where did that come from?"
No, you don't. I'm saying that. You're
not. But join in me. Pretend that you
you you share my enthusiasm for this.
Wow, where did this shape come from? I
want to show you where this shape comes
from. This shape comes from multiplying.
uh and in particular
um the uh number of ways the relative
number of ways to observe an a single L
toss across all the proportions of water
is is on the far left of this slide.
It's it's that diagonal pink line that I
showed you previously. Yeah. And now
probably intuitively you can see that if
I observe a water toss it's the same
kind of line but mirror imaged.
Yeah. And that's the middle column here.
We want to multiply these so that we
count up all the ways to observe both.
And if you multiply these two uh
horizontal lines together, you get this
dome which may not be immediately
obvious, but I have spent a half hour
generating an animation that I would
like to share with you, which may not
help, but I made it and so I'm going to
share it with you. Okay, here's what we
do. We're going to start on the left
here. see these vertical diagonal lines
on each of these three graphs. I'm going
to take that vertical dash line and I'm
going to sweep it across. And what we're
going to be doing is everywhere where
those vertical lines intersect, we're
going to multiply the values where the
vertical line touches. And then we're
going to get the product on the far
right. Okay. So, we start on the far
left here. You can see we've got a
value, a big value. It's actually two,
but that doesn't matter. We've got a big
value times zero, so it's zero. So you
can see on the far left the dome is at
zero on the far left. The same logic
tells you it must be zero on the far
right. We'll get there, right? But now
we're going to sweep to the middle. If
if if this works. Yes. Oh yeah. It's
very satisfying.
A life well spent. Okay. So now we're at
the middle and in the middle here it it
um
um we've got two intermediate values
that we multiply them together. This is
where the curve is maximized because
beyond this point one of the the lines
are at the same height at this point.
Beyond this point one of them is smaller
than the other and the smaller value
will drag the whole thing down as it
goes towards zero. So this is the point
in where where the far right product is
maximized. Yeah. And then it's just it's
a perfectly symmetrical problem. So now
we descend again towards zero on the
side. So the dome comes is no mystery to
it at all where this shape comes from.
It just comes from multiplying
possibilities just as before. Um if you
want a really simple demonstration of
yourself, here's a a single uh piece of
R code. Just plot 0 to 10* 10 to 0 and
you will get the same shape.
Yeah, it's my job to demystify these
things. Um, all right. Let me speed up a
little bit. We're going to toss the
globe a third time
just just to finish the the punch line
here. Now, we get a land, a water, and a
land. We've got two land. So, the
massive evidence is shifted towards a
dry earth, right? You'll see that
there's more probability below a half
than above it because of what the sample
is here. This is still exactly just um
multiplying one red diagonal times a
blue diagonal times the red diagonal.
It's the same thing. But then it now
this is the shape you get. You can get
lots of shapes as you pile up more and
more and more of these samples, right?
But fundamentally all that's happening
underneath is multiplying diagonals. Not
multiplying, convolving is the word
actually in probability theory. You're
convolving diagonals uh together. Did
this help at all? Yeah, good. Okay. Um,
yes. Yeah. And in and one line of R code
to verify this. Plot 10 0 * 0 10 time 10
0 and you'll get this shape.
All right. Uh, we can do all 10 tosses
of the globe. And don't worry, I'm not
going to keep we're going to jump to the
end now. All 10 tosses of the globe. And
you can see all the shifts. With each
new observation, we update. We take the
previous posterior. becomes a prior and
we update it and it shifts to the new
location. And notice that it's getting
taller and more concentrated because
evidence is accumulating within a
narrower region of the of the horizontal
axis of the possible proportions of
water.
Yeah, does that make sense? Um, and it
may be nicer to kind of look at this in
a a set of figures, a sequential
figures. This is a figure that's in the
book. Uh the book can't have animations,
unfortunately. One day we will have
actual digital uh textbooks that really
have animation and interactive graphs,
but um we're not there yet. Uh but
here's here's what you'd see in the
book. And this might be uh easier to see
because you can do all the comparisons
on one screen. We start in the in the
top left. The first update gives us that
blue diagonal. And then we observe a
land and we get a hill. Uh this is a
different sample than the one I used
before. We observe a water and so on.
um all the way down to the last of nine
samples. And we've got um in the bottom
right a posterior distribution for all
nine of those samples where most of the
posterior probability is above a half.
Um good, we've learned something true
about the globe. Uh the shape of this
embodies um uh a bunch of different
things. So I want to spend just a few
slides now talking about
uh I don't want to say the proper
interpretation of this shape but things
that you should keep in mind um they're
true of all posterior distributions and
this may be some conflict with your
previous training if you haven't had a
base course before.
>> Yeah question
>> um so now you're able to access the
yaxis posterior probability so you
normalize the density kind of
I was wondering actually why it was two
before
>> unintuitive to
>> yeah there's two um this is still a
density so uh there in in a probability
theory there are a bunch of things that
can be called probability and
unfortunately they're different so
you've got probability densities and
you've got probability masses so and a
probability mass is the integral of a
set of probability densities, but
they're both called probabilities for
shorthand. So these are POS the the
vertical axis here is a posterior
probability density. So it's the same as
what it was before. And I've taken the
units off so you're not distracted.
>> It would go only to one now.
>> No, it it wouldn't. The area under the
curve is one.
>> But the units on the or the numbers
there are no units. The numbers on the
vertical axis could be I mean they'll
they're just arbitrary. It just depends
upon the shape of of what you're
integrating.
>> But it could be more than one.
>> It could
>> they could it could it can even be
negative. Uh all kinds of crazy stuff
can happen in calculus. Yeah. So I don't
want to generalize in this case. Your
intuition is valid uh to some extent.
Yes. But no, you can get you can have
numbers once you integrate you can have
numbers greater than one, but once you
integrate it, it'll all sum to one.
Right? because each value is infinite
gets as an infinite decimal weight,
>> right? Let's not descend into calculus.
If if those of you if some of you want
to stay after the lecture and descend
into calculus with me, I would I would
be happy to do that. Um the weather's
bad outside. There's nothing better to
do today, right? Uh but yeah, it's it's
yeah, unfortunately true. Weird stuff
happens. Okay, but yeah, the area under
these curves is one in every case. Um
but the the height is this mysterious
density thing. This is going to matter
when we start well it it won't matter in
in this course in this section. In the
other section there are going to be
coding decisions that come from making a
distinction between masses and densities
but we're not going to have to worry
about that in this section. Uh but there
is sort of like yeah there are cases
where you need to be really careful
about that to avoid some mistakes but
it's a good question. Thank you. Okay.
Um let me say a few things about these
posterior distributions in general and
this will apply to all posterior
distributions you might see. Uh but
there's extra stuff I'll be able to say
in in particular examples. Uh the first
thing is and this is a general feature
of basian inference. There's no minimum
sample size for valid inference. I point
this out because this is a question I
get a lot. people, you've previously
taken a non-basian statistics course and
you were told that like 30 observations
is the minimum. This is a number I've
been been told a lot. Have anybody here
heard this? Yeah. See, it's a thing like
uh I hang out with statistitians a lot
and we're all confused by this. We don't
know where it comes from. It seems to be
some sort of folk rumor that has spread
across national boundaries. No one knows
where it started or what justifies it.
is not justified. Okay. Not even in
non-basian inference. But in basian
inference, the goal is not.
So those things about minimum sample
size in non-basian frameworks in some
non-basian frameworks arises because the
method is justified by approximations
for large samples. And so the question
is what counts as large so that the
approximation is good enough. But we're
not making approximations here. There
are no approximations in any of the
calculus I have just showed you. This is
an exact inference for the exact sample
that you got. Does that make sense? Now,
we can do large sample approximations in
bay. I'm not against large sample
approximations. Yeah, assumptions buy
your lunch, right? They cost you
something, but they they buy you
something. So, I'm not against making
assumptions, but in this case, in this
example, we've made no approximations.
So, this is an exact inference. Um, so
there's no minimum sample size. Uh I I
sometimes joke it's it's a form of
trolling that the minimum sample size
for a valid basian analysis is zero. You
can learn a lot by writing down a
generative model with no data and
simulating predictions from it. Yeah,
you can learn a lot about the scientific
system you're studying and that's a very
useful thing to do and we will do it in
this course. Uh yeah, I think it's a
really nice thing to do and then you get
one data point. Yay update and you can
see what the impact of your first
observation is even this is done it's
not just a joke in clin basian clinical
trials this is what you do you do you
continuously update the analysis as data
comes in because you want to stop the
trial as soon as you're sure there's
therapeutic benefit would be unethical
to continue the trial so you're
constantly updating yeah that's that's a
standard that's a that's a standard
that's an ethical standard yeah if you
know that people are benefiting
As soon as you're confident that people
are benefiting, you must stop the trial
and give the treatment to everybody.
Yeah. Anything else would make you a
monster. Okay? Now, you can do that with
frequentist stats, too. Uh so, it isn't
that frequentists are monsters. That's
not what I'm saying. It's just that the
procedure is different. All right? But
this is what we're doing. We're getting
exact inference for any whatever
whatever data we have. Um, oh, I should
say before I move on, this is a really
important thing in branches of science
where data is expensive. Uh, or
sometimes like it's it's priceless. Uh,
think about astrophysics. Uh, we have
some great telescopes now and
astrophysics has become a big data
science field, but that's incredibly
recent and it's still true. Like if you
want estimates of the mass of black
holes, it's you're not just going to
like go online and get it, right? It's
not like being a social psychologist.
Apology psychologists. No, this is a
this is flattering to you. You can go
online to Qualrix or whatever the
whatever platform it is uh um and get
more subjects uh for for relatively
cheap, but you don't get estimates of
black hole masses on the cheap. You need
to reserve your telescope time. Yeah,
this is hard. So, doing the best you can
with however little data you have is
important. Um I'm an anthropologist. I
know there are anthropologists in this
room. You know how this feels too,
right? We're gonna just get some more
fossils. Just get some more DNA. Sure,
just go do it. Go sit in a laser uh a
laser precise pit for a few months and
excavate pig teeth, you know, in the
hopes that you'll find some monkey,
right? That's what our field is like.
And the data are scarce. They trickle
in. Every time we get new data, we want
to update. This is how it works. Okay.
Uh the second thing I want to emphasize
is that the shape of this distribution
uh embodies the sample size. There's no
need to keep track of how much data went
into calculating this because all of the
information that's of any use is already
embodied in the shape of this. Uh I say
this because in some non-basian uh
workflows, you're always kind of
carrying around the sample size because
you need it to calculate things like
degrees of freedom. Yeah. And we don't
do that here. uh there's no need to do
that at all. You've got a posterior
distribution, you can plug it into uh
any any model as a prior distribution
and keep going. The sample sizes are all
the evidence that the data provides
relative to the generative model is
embodied in the shape of this
distribution.
Um
point estimates uh point estimates in
bays are just for summary and
communication. They're not what we're
after. the the estimate is the
distribution.
I'll say that again. The estimate is the
distribution. It's not a value. Right?
Now, sometimes the posterior
distribution is really tightly
concentrated around a very small range
of points and then it's no problem to
summarize that with a single value. Uh
but that will not be your career.
I'm willing to predict because it
doesn't usually happen. Uh so the
estimate is the distribution and in
everything we do in this class we're
going to use the whole distribution to
create predictions and comparisons and
effect sizes and all those things we'll
use the whole distribution.
Um maybe another way to say this is um
in in non-basian stats you get a point
estimate what that's what estimators
produce they produce a point estimate
and then you have to as a secondary
procedure generate uncertainty around
it. In bays, we don't get a point
estimate at all. All we get is
uncertainty.
Yeah. And and the only point of a point
estimate is to have a summary in uh uh
for for communication. Um so there are
lots of different point estimates.
Sometimes you'll see people report modes
as a kind of most typical value. Uh
other times means. In this class, I'm
mainly going to report means, but that's
not because the mean is the right
estimate. It's just a central guess.
It's the most sort of typical value for
the distribution.
Um
how do we talk about uncertainty? Uh
conventionally in papers and for uh ease
of description, we often report
intervals. Um and the thing about
intervals is that you can construct them
different ways and there's an infinite
number of them. Uh so you just have to
choose them based upon your
communication goals. So for example, we
could choose a 50% central interval. Um,
now notice that what's a 50% interval?
We want to have some interval on the
horizontal axis that encloses 50% of the
area under the curve. Yeah, but there's
an infinite number of these because we
could slide this interval left and right
and its width would change as we slide
it left and right. So usually what we
report is called the central interval
where what's left out on the left and
right is the same mass. So we a 50%
central interval is the 50% middle and
then there's 25% on the left and 25% on
the right. And that's what this is.
Yeah. But there's an infinite number of
these 50% intervals. It's just the
central one kind of makes the most
intuitive sense. But it's not m for
that's not a very strong justification
for any kind of decision. It's just
about summary. If you wanted to tell
your colleagues where this the the
mass is in the middle, this is a good
thing to report. And then you can widen
this to like 89. I'm going to use a lot
of 89% intervals in this course. Um for
reasons that are secret,
but no, they're given away in the book,
but so you'll read the book. But um uh
the exact width of it doesn't really
matter uh because this basian intervals
don't have frequentist coverage
properties. They don't they're not about
type one error rates. That is not what
they are at all. So you shouldn't read
them that way. Um but the interval
communicates the shape of the posterior.
And if you give multiple intervals then
you get the shape back, right? So often
showing just showing the posterior
distribution is the best way to
communicate. But if you have lots of um
distributions to communicate, you'll
need to have intervals. Um yeah, so you
could even go all the way up to 99% and
say where almost all the mass is. Uh uh
and there's nothing special about 95% is
what I want to say. Nothing. It's a
smooth curve, right? So nothing happens
at the boundary of an interval. I'll say
that again. It's a smooth curve. Nothing
happens at the boundary of the interval,
right? You don't go from true to false
values. Yeah. I'll I'll go back in the
animation and you'll see at the edges of
this red interval. Nothing's happening.
At the edges of this one, nothing is
happening. At the edges of this one,
nothing is happening. Yeah, relax.
Nothing magical happens at the boundary
of a 95% interval. Okay. Um
I' I'm right on time. I think I've got
I've got about 10 minutes to finish
talking about what we do with these
estimates. Now, remind you here's the
core basian workflow. I'm filling it in
for the globe tossing example. On the
left, we have our generative model, our
estim. We built the basian estimator.
Um, we combined it with data to get an
estimate, which is the posterior
distribution. Now, what do we do with
this thing? So all I've talked about so
far is a little bit about summary and
description. Uh constructing intervals,
reporting means um but often we want to
do something with our estimates. And
those somethings uh usually involve some
kind of what I call posterior
prediction. We want the model to make
predictions now that it's been trained
on a sample. Um if we now that we've
updated the generative model so that it
knows about the data what kind of globe
does it envision including all the
uncertainty in it and those predictions
that we could push out of the generative
model are called posterior predictions.
Um, this is a big uh uh uh basket of
different kinds of things you might want
to uh simulate out of your models. And
we'll it'll include effect sizes and
forecasts and all kinds of things, but
also model checks. And often in this
course, the first thing we're going to
do is we're going to push predictions
out of the model for the sample, which
sounds crazy, but bear with me. It's
useful because it allows us to see if
the model fits the data at all and
sometimes it won't. Can the model even
predict the sample it was trained on.
Some models can't. And so the first
thing we do is a model check, a
posterior model check where we do
posterior predictions. In this case, it
will work, but I'll show you cases where
it where it does badly, models that do
badly. Yes, there are stat models that
can't even predict the sample they were
trained on. um in production, in
industry, uh in medicine. Yes, uh they
exist. So, you have to do model checks.
Um here's the basic idea. Uh this is
kind of the study slide with all the
little owls, right? Remember the owl is
about workflow. Whenever you see the
owl, um uh we've got the posterior
distribution, but most of our scientific
questions live in the outcome space of
observable events. And the posterior
distribution doesn't have observable
events in it. It's relative
plausibilities of generative models
which is not an observable space for a
sane person right uh scientists want to
talk about distributions of observable
data what does the model think the data
would look like in the future if we made
it uh wanted it to give predictions
that's a kind of of thing that we
simulate out of the posterior
distribution and I want to talk about
how to do that um but we do lots of
other things with simulation as well and
I'll give you a hint of that as well and
then next week we'll do lots more Um so
effect sizes, intervals, predictions,
model checks, these are all kinds of
predictions that we push out of the
posterior using the generative model. Um
and we want to use the whole posterior
distribution so that our predictions are
uncertain in the right way. And this
sounds like it might be complicated, but
it's actually easy. It's the easiest
thing. And I'll teach you how to do it
using samples and it will work for any
kind of statistical model you might ever
use in your career. Okay, that's a nice
thing about it. Um and the reason is
because instead of of so usually when
you average over um a continuous
parameter space you have to do an
integral and I already told you that
most integrals can't be done by anybody
not even Terry Tao could do them and um
but we can take samples from the
posterior distribution and then just
numerically integrate by computing the
proper function for each sample and then
collecting all the results as a
distribution. And that's really all
there is to it. Now, as words, that
could be confusing. Uh, so I'm going to
show you an example. Um, if we wanted to
sample from the posterior distribution
here. So, we calculated the posterior
distribution in this example
analytically using uh this this function
called the beta distribution, which is
that formula that I derived for you. But
we could also do it just by sampling.
And um here I'm going to sample from the
beta distribution. Uh that's the first
line there. And then I'm going to show
you that the samples are an
approximation of the analytical
distribution. Yeah. So showing you the
red curve, the red density estimate are
from the samples, the random numbers I
generated from the beta. And
unsurprisingly, they follow the actual
beta distribution. Okay. What's cool
about this is usually when we when we do
bays, we only have the samples because
we can't do the integral, but they the
samples are a good approximation. And so
we can do all of the necessary work that
we need to do just with the samples. Let
me give you uh the final cartoon of this
lecture to to show you how this works.
So on the left here we have the
posterior distribution and the dancing
vertical uh pink line are random samples
from this posterior distribution. Um
random samples means these are samples
that are taken so that they're
proportional their their probability is
proportional to the height. Right. So
things in the middle are sampled more
often and things on the edge are sampled
less often. And if you watch this long
enough, you'll see that. Yeah. But I
won't make you do that. Okay. Um we're
going to take these samples and then
we're going to feed them back into the
generative model. And the generative
model is going to predict make a
predictive distribution
um for the number of water samples.
Notice that the horizontal axis has
changed. Now the horizontal axis in the
middle is the number of water in a
sample of nine tosses for the value
sampled on the left. Right? So it's like
we sample one value from the posterior
distribution. We simulate nine tosses.
We've got an idea of the distribution of
data sets that we would get. And that's
what the histogram in the middle is.
It's the distribution of possible
samples of nine that we would get. Um
for low values of the posterior low
values of P sampled on the left, the
predictive distributions shifts to the
left, but samples that have lots of
water are still possible. They'll be
rare. And um uh likewise, if you sample
a high value of the proportion of water,
you'll get a predictive distribution
shifted to the right, but there will
still be rare samples that have almost
no water in them. Yeah. Do you see this?
Yeah. It's it's it's magical. It's
hypnotizing. Yes. Okay. Uh you're a good
crowd. Thank you. You indulge me. Um
now, but that's not good enough. We
don't want single values. We want to
average over the entire posterior
distribution on the left. So we can do
that just by accumulating random samples
from the middle. So So follow me now. We
we sample from the left. We generate um
a single sample uh uh from the middle.
That is we we generate a sample and
count how many waters we got. And that's
the red bar that I've shown you there.
We're taking likely samples. And so high
bars represent numbers of waters that
are more likely to be sampled. We then
add those to the far right. We go back
to the left. We sample another
proportion of water. And we do it all
over again. We do this like 100,000
times. Your computer does very quickly.
The code for this is in the book. Uh
it's just like three lines. Um and then
the distribution we get on the far right
is the posterior predictive distribution
that contains all of the uncertainty.
It's still growing. You can see uh on
the slide, it contains all of the
uncertainty in the posterior
distribution and it shows the predictive
expectations of the model given the
amount of data that it's been trained
on. It's still quite unsure about what
sorts of new data you would see if you
toss the globe more, but it has learned
a lot from the sample you've gotten. And
the point is for it is to reliably
represent the uncertainty of the
posterior distribution. And this is the
way to do it without doing integral
calculus. And you can do this again for
any model. You got a posterior
distribution, take samples, push the
samples back through the generative
model. You can compute all kinds of
predictions, interventions, effect
sizes, model checks. Um, it's a it's a
very useful thing. It's a central
technique. Does this make some sense?
>> Yeah. Question.
>> You do the double sampling sampling
twice because usually we don't work with
binomial models. Is that why this
happens?
>> Um, yeah. Well, the double sampling here
is for rhetorical reasons. just to make
sure all the steps are clear in the
logic. When you write the code, you can
compress it for sure and then you can
just use like our binome here and do it
real fast. And I think one of the code
examples in the book is one line because
you can just pass samples from R works
on vectors. So you can fill a vector
with posterior distribution samples and
pass that to our binome in one line and
get the far right distribution.
>> What I mean is after the first step,
could we just add them up based on
weights? something like that and average
them.
>> Well, you need you need um you need the
average of the middle a the middle
average by the left,
>> right? So that's why we're taking and
we're taking samples to do that
averaging here because we're sampling
proportionally from the left. Um whereas
in the integral we'd sweep across and
we'd calculate the properties of the
middle for each unique value and then
we'd weight them properly by their
posterior predictions. That's how you do
the integral. In the random sampling
case, it sort of takes care of itself
because the random draw part gives the
proportionality. Maybe that wasn't your
question. I'm sorry. But
good for now. Sorry. Yeah. Um, okay. Let
me move on. Um, oh, here's the faster
version. Okay. Much more satisfying. So,
uh, does this make sense? You're going
to do this a lot because this is how we
process statistical um uh statistical
output in applied basian statistics
almost always is through simulating from
samples. Uh and it it it means that you
get to you get all the power of calculus
without having to do it. Yeah. Uh so
it's a really nice thing to do. Okay,
just a couple things uh left. uh it's
really important that you use the whole
posterior distribution because if you
don't then your predictions are
overconfident. So it turns out for this
posterior distribution for this
particular example this particular uh uh
uh sample that the posterior mean is 64.
So we could generate a posterior
predictive distribution just for that
value. to say we knew for sure the globe
had 64 a proportion of its surface is
covered by water is 64 and we generated
a posterior distribution it would be the
black bars on this graph um but the
entire posterior distribution what I
just showed you in the animation is the
blue bars and it's squatter it's flatter
because there's more uncertainty right
you want the blue and not the black the
black is overconfident right you're
throwing away all the uncertainty by
just taking the central value Um, it's
very easy to make this mistake
innocently even if you know you
shouldn't do it. And so if I want to
give you a heristic, I'll repeat this in
future examples. A heristic to avoid
this mistake, it would be always
summarize last. Do all of your
calculations with the full distribution.
And then summary is always the last
step. Summary is like taking a mean.
Okay? So if you ever find yourself
tempted to take a mean, ask yourself if
you have more calculations to do. And if
you do, stop. Do not take a mean, right?
Do not plug a mean into a function. The
mean is how you summarize stuff that's
been through functions. It's that I will
say this over and over again. Everybody
makes this mistakes. Um I tell my PhD
students that they will make this
mistake and they're like nah. And then
they make this mistake. I have made this
mistake before. I have been there. Yeah.
Um past me is you right. So I am with
you in this. Okay. I am out of time. Um
I just want to say uh sampling is fun
and easy. We're going to do a lot with
this uh no matter how complicated the
statistical model gets. You can do lots
of useful uh scientific projection to
the things of interest like effect
sizes, forecasts, posterior predictions,
model comparisons, all those things can
be done by simulating observations
through the generative model using the
posterior distribution. Um uh the other
thing that we're going to do with
simulation starting next lecture is
prior predictions uh as well. Same sort
of thing. A model that hasn't seen any
data can be used exactly the same way
because priors are posteriors. They're
all distributions of relative
plausibilities. And it's very useful to
do prior um uh simulate prior
predictions before you fit data because
it's a way to understand the model and
and often it leads to model revisions
and to fixing the model. And we'll start
talking about that um next week when I
see you again. Thanks for your
indulgence and I'll see you next week.